list of energy storage projects - wikipedia from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia the ffestiniog pumped storage dam in wales, uk, is an early example of a major energy storage facility, built in 1963. the 150 mw andasol solar power station is a commercial parabolic trough solar thermal power plant, located in spain. the andasol plant uses tanks of molten salt to store captured solar energy so that it can continue generating electricity when the sun isn't shining. this is a list of energy storage projects worldwide. many individual energy storage projects augment electrical grids by capturing excess electrical energy during periods of low demand and storing it in other forms until needed on an electrical grid. the energy is later converted back to its electrical form and returned to the grid as needed. another energy storage method is the consumption of surplus or low-cost energy (typically during night time) for conversion into resources such as hot water, cool water or ice, which is then used for heating or cooling at other times when electricity is in higher demand and at greater cost per kilowatt hour (kwh). such thermal energy storage is often employed at end-user sites such as large buildings, and also as part of district heating, thus 'shifting' energy consumption to other times for better balancing of supply and demand. some notable energy storage projects include sir adam beck hydroelectric generating stations, bear swamp hydroelectric power station, seneca pumped storage generating station, salina pumped storage project, carters dam, smith mountain dam, and matanoagawa dam. system types[edit] forms of energy storage[edit] see also: energy storage and grid energy storage for more complete lists of all forms of energy storage, including biological and non-commercial types. mechanical: compressed air energy storage flywheel energy storage gravitational potential energy storage pumped hydroelectric storage (phs), or pumped storage hydropower (psh), see: pumped-storage hydroelectricity thermal: cool water, hot water or ice thermal storage, see: thermal energy storage and seasonal thermal energy storage liquid air or liquid nitrogen energy storage, see: cryogenic energy storage molten salt storage chemical: battery, battery energy storage system (bess), flow battery, secondary battery, see: rechargeable battery hydrogen storage power to gas electromagnetic: storage coil, superconducting storage coil, see: superconducting magnetic energy storage projects and sites[edit] listing[edit] this is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. you can help by expanding it with reliably sourced entries. note: this table is sortable by clicking once or twice on the triangle symbols ( ? ) at the top of each column. see also[edit] distributed generation energy energy density energy reduction assets energy storage challenge grid energy storage hybrid renewable energy system list of concentrating solar thermal power companies list of energy topics list of geothermal power stations list of pumped-storage hydroelectric power stations list of solar thermal power stations lists of wind farms by country power transmission pumped-storage hydroelectric power stations (category) u.s. doe international energy storage database